Gender? Gender! Hyperobject!

Abstract

Gender is confusing! Have you ever tried to define gender for yourself? How far have you come? If I think about what makes me a woman I never have a clear answer. Is it my body? No! My Ability to bear children? Eww no! Is it because I am so empathic? I probably am but that’s not a criteria I would use to define me as a woman…  I could go on like this for ages. In the end there is nothing that makes me say “ Ohh this is why I am a woman” with certainty. My strongest evidence is that it does not feel wrong to say “I am a woman” but that does not seem very convincing even to me.
I thought maybe seeing gender from a different angle, will offer some clarity. So what’s better than to look at gender through the lens of hyperobjects, since hyperobjects are at least just as confusing to me as gender, if not more. But it is this confusion, in which there lies some sort of liberation. 
Following this logic it seems like a good idea to intertwine hyperobjects and gender… But before we dive straight into this chaos of ‘Hyperobject x Gender’ let’s first introduce the concept of hyperobjects.
The Philosophy of Hyperobjects is situated in the Object Oriented Ontology.
What are hyperobjects? Hyperobjects are entities. Entities, which we cannot see nor touch, but we can think them and therefore we know they exist, we are even part of them.  Hyperobjects may not be visible, but their effects are exhibited interobjectively, directly influencing our lived realities. Since hyperobjects are so over dimensional, their existence outliving our lifespan by far, this is what makes grasping them so hard. Further it is important not to forget: We are always caught up inside a hyperobject, moving with it. This makes it impossible to distance oneself from it or looking at it objectively.  
Looking closer we are ought to realize that a lot of the qualities of what makes a hyperobject, a hyperobject, can be found in the conceptualization of gender. That’s what I want to focus on.
I am positive, if we understand gender as a hyperobject, this gives us new ways to think about gender, a margin for maneuvering gender expression and possibly even helps to deconstruct the prevailing gender dichotomy. Let’s Fetz! 


Short Essay

Timothy Morton is a philosopher and fierce advocate of Object Oriented Ontology (OOO). According to OOO everything is an object, first and foremost existing by itself, the idea of humans as a subject is rejected. Morton introduced the concept of hyperobjects as a way to talk about objects that are Hyper  in their relation to other objects. They are so massively distributed in time and space, that it is impossible to fully grasp them, humbling us in the process, even more so forcing us to re-think our core ideas of existence and what it means to live in a society. (Morton, 2013) It is fair to say: “Hyperobjects have already had a significant impact on human social and psychic space”. (Morton, 2013. p. 2)  
Before I go into detail on how gender is a hyperobject, let’s take a quick look at the definition of gender. The WHO defines gender as follows: “Gender refers to the characteristics of women, men, girls and boys that are socially constructed.  This includes norms, behaviors and roles associated with being a woman, man, girl or boy, as well as relationships with each other. As a social construct, gender varies from society to society and can change over time.” ((World Health Organization: WHO, 2019)) 
Disclaimer: When I am talking about gender in this context, I especially mean the hegemonic gender dichotomy. 
While reading ‘Hyperobjects - Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World’, the first time I thought “Oh well this sounds a lot like gender to me” was during the passage where Morton explains the Kantian gap between phenomenon and thing with an analogy of raindrops. Later it is stated that “because [hyperobjects] so massively outscale us, [they] have magnified this weirdness of things for our inspection: things are themselves, but we can’t point to them directly” (Morton, 2013. p. 12). This makes so much sense if projected onto gender. Much like rain, the effects of the gender dichotomy are omnipresent, but it is impossible to grasp every little aspect affecting us, particularly because in reality there are a lot of different gender identities. Here too, a gap is created between phenomenon, gender conceptualized as a dichotomy, and thing, the many different gender identities existing. From this gap Morton deduces the “phase of hypocrisy, weakness and lameness” (Morton, 2013. p. 2). Since hyperobjects are so disturbingly massive and interconnected, that it would be presumptuous to assume we could pervade them in their entirety. Nevertheless they are often talked about in a matter of fact way, which results in a hypocrisy. We are, in a sense, hypocritical because we pretend to know and understand what is going on in the world when, in fact, much of what is happening is invisible or incomprehensible to us. Hypocrisy thus refers to a mistaking of one's own nature and position.
Another much more profound sentence I stumbled upon, and instantly was reminded of how similar this is to how I think about gender, goes as follows: “The more we know about hyperobjects, the stranger they become.” (Morton, 2013. p. 6) In the abstract I already illustrated this strangeness. At first glance gender (dichotomy) seems pretty clear. There are two socially constructed roles, being fulfilled by different people, but when looking at this more closely it seems weirder and weirder: Why are there typically two roles? How come so many people feel at odds with how things are? Which criteria would I use to define myself, if I deem most of the common ones unfitting?  
“By simultaneously zooming and pulling away, we appear to be in the same place, yet the place seems to distort beyond our control. The two contradictory motions don’t cancel one another out. Rather, they reestablish the way we experience “here.” The double denial doesn’t do away with human experience” (Morton, 2013. p. 19). Everything is about to get a little more chaotic now, trying to make sense of how this is true for gender too. Zooming into gender makes all these lived gender identities visible, which are not covered by the gender dichotomy. Pulling away means staying within the binary. The contradictory aspect in relation to gender is, right now we need both. We still need the categories men and women, even if they are limiting. We have just begun to introduce desperately needed fields such as gender medicine or gender specific city planning to address problems faced by women and other minorities. It is inevitable, we need to rely on these categories for a little while longer, at least until we understand how medicine in women’s bodies works differently compared to how it works on men or how the daily life of women has been hindered, because cities have been built with only men in mind for centuries.  
On the other hand if we would just zoom in, this could maybe result in an infinite amount of gender definitions, because everyone probably defines gender a little bit differently for themselves. Furthermore, if we stay in the zoomed in state of lived gender identities it gets even more complicated. Even if you put a lot of effort and thought in how you want to present your gender identity, it is not a given that you are perceived in the way you wish. How you are seen by the outside world is heavily influenced by everyone’s perception of gender. I think the most banal example is the one of girls with short hair, who in most cases will be addressed as a boy at least once, because most people still associate short hair with being a typical boy thing. 
“We are always inside an object” (Morton, 2013. p. 17) fits so well with gender, because gender is everywhere, at any time. It affects every aspect of our daily lives, sometimes it is more obvious, other times it happens without us even noticing. But no one is able to escape the effects the conceptualization of gender in society has on us. Even if you are agender, you’ll have to deal with the consequences of the deeply engrained gender dichotomy in society. This is one of the reasons why it is impossible to ever look at gender truly objective. Morton even goes as far as to say that “inside the hyperobject we are always in the wrong” (Morton, 2013. p. 153). But since we are always inside the hyperobject “[t]his [also] means that every decision we make is in some sense related to hyperobjects”. (Morton, 2013. p.20)  This condition opens up new possibilities, because it means everything we do has an effect. 
Now feels like a good time to introduce the concept of Gender Performance as a tool, we can use to our benefit, while trying to navigate gender.
Gender performance is a concept introduced by Judith Butler's theory of gender performativity. Gender performance theory suggests that gender identity is not something inherent or natural, but rather a social construct that is created and maintained through repeated acts of performance, such as dress, mannerisms, and speech. By performing certain gender roles and behaviors, an individual creates a gender identity. Thus, gender, according to Butler's theory, is not a fixed, inherent feature of an individual, but a dynamic, fluid construct that is constantly being shaped and reshaped through performative acts. Gender performance theory challenges traditional notions of gender as a binary and fixed category and provides a framework for understanding gender as a socially constructed and culturally contingent phenomenon. By performing gender in ways that challenge traditional gender roles, individuals can help to destabilize and subvert the gender dichotomy. (Butler, 1990)
The concept of gender performativity in combination with the fluidity of hyperobjects throughout time and space, leaves me feeling hopeful in the ambition to end gender dichotomy. Interpreting gender as a hyperobject leaves a lot of room for self-efficacy. When every decision we make affects the hyperobject ‘Gender Dichotomy’, we can decide every day again to act against the predominant dichotomy. Every choice to act outside the binary is a little act of rebellion, gnawing at the implicitness of the gender dichotomy.  
Some dimensions of how these little acts of non-conformance can look like can be witnessed in certain online spaces / communities. There some gendered terms are used decoupled from the gender they describe, and more often then not are used to describe a certain aesthetic or sometimes a feeling, such terms could be ‘femboy’ or ‘babygirl’. If fans like a certain aesthetic of a person or character they may be saying things such as ‘ohhh new gender (envy) just dropped’. Indubitably, it is obvious to everyone that a person and/or their style can’t be a gender. Rather this should be understood as a way to express admiration, while simultaneously finding that certain person / character attractive and being kind of envious of their looks. 
Looking at gender through the lens of hyperobject philosophy may not have helped to create clarity, but it has definitely helped to feel more confident in being uncertain. Considering everything, I think it is good to view gender as a hyperobject, even if it results in a feeling of being overwhelmed. There is no clear cut answer to explain gender and there shouldn’t be one. It just gets more chaotic the deeper you dive into thinking about gender and that’s okay. Honestly I believe chaos is the strong point of hyperobjects. I advocate for more chaos, more genders, a bolder expression of identity. It has to get so confusing, no simple one-way answer seems reasonable anymore. 

Biblography
Butler, J. (1990). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. Routledge.
Morton, T. (2013). Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World. University of Minnesota Press.
World Health Organization: WHO (2019) Gender. https://www.who.int/health-topics/gender#tab=tab_1. (accessed on 20.01.2024)  

Images
All Images in the Zine are hashtags and captions from Tumblr all rights belong to the creators (accessed on 21.01.2014)

